Welcome to Metal updates
for the A14 Bionic.
My name is Anand Poovekurussi and
I work in GPU software at Apple.
The A14 Bionic is at the heart of
iPhone 12 and the new iPad Air.
In this video,
my colleague Swami and I will
introduce you to the GPU capabilities
of the A14 Bionic and the new
Metal features that it enables.
The A14 has big updates to our CPU, GPU,
Neural Engine and other
custom technologies that
drive the iOS experience.
It uses breakthrough
5nm process technology,
which brings new features,
increased performance and even
more power efficiency in nearly
every aspect of the chip.
We have built a world-class
mobile GPU into the A14 Bionic.
It has four cores,
scaled to deliver the maximum sustainable
performance at the lowest possible power.
Now, in terms of Metal,
there are some specific changes
in the A14 that will improve the
performance of your Metal apps.
Starting off with GPU-driven pipelines.
Indirect command buffers in Metal enable
you to move work to the GPU and let you
encode commands on the GPU timeline.
This frees up valuable CPU time for you
to perform other tasks in your apps.
The A14 GPU architecture makes
such usage models more efficient.
Next,
we have made significant performance
improvements to the design of
GPU Thread Group memory to better
support parallel computing.
We expect synchronization primitives
such as Thread Group scoped atomics
to see great performance benefits
as a result of these changes.
Finally, the ability to conserve memory
bandwidth continues to be a significant
design advantage of our platforms.
The A14 GPU leverages brand
new compression hardware,
which brings even more
bandwidth savings to your apps.
Frame buffer compression is expected
to improve by 15% or more on average,
and depth buffers should see 40%
or more improvement on average.
All the new capabilities of the A14
GPU belong to a new Metal feature set,
called Apple GPU Family 7.
Here’s what we’ll be
covering in this video.
First up, I will talk about barycentric
coordinates and primitive ID.
I will also show you how both of
these features can be used together to
implement deferred rendering techniques
such as the visibility buffer.
After that,
I will quickly introduce the new
texture addressing modes in A14.
We also have brand new features
for apps doing compute.
In the second section of the talk,
my colleague Swami will talk about
the new SIMD reduction instructions
that provide an efficient way for
applications to perform reduction
operations at SIMD group scope.
He will also cover the new SIMD matrix
multiply instructions in Metal on A14.
These new instructions provide
significant performance boost for
large matrix multiplies that are used
in machine learning and image compute.
Let’s look at each of
these in more detail.
Starting with barycentric
coordinates and primitive ID.
Apple GPU Family 7 now provides access to
barycentric coordinates and primitive ID.
Barycentric coordinates
define the exact location of
a fragment within a primitive.
And now you can access these coordinates
right in your fragment shader.
As you can see in the
picture on the right,
the location of the fragment at point
P is defined as a weighted sum of
the vertices that form the triangle,
where the sum of the weights is 1.
In the Metal shading language,
the barycentric coordinates
of the fragment are exposed
as a vector of floats.
Let’s take a look at a technique
which can benefit from using
barycentric coordinates.
Procedural generation is a
class of techniques used to
algorithmically generate models,
animations, and effects.
You can do all sorts of procedural
effects on the surface of the
primitives such as particle systems,
terrains, or vegetation on the fly.
Drawing custom lines is one such example.
Let’s take a look at how barycentric
coordinates can be used for this.
Let’s say you wanted to use
procedural generation to draw custom,
high-quality anti-alias lines
and borders on triangles.
To do this,
you can apply interesting mathematical
functions on the distance of the fragment
from the edges of your primitive.
Barycentric coordinates of your
fragment in essence give you
the distance from the edges.
The examples above show some interesting
functions applied on the barycentric
coordinates in your fragment shader
to generate on-the-fly effects.
Another new feature of
Metal on A14 is primitive ID.
Primitive ID tells you which
primitive the current fragment
corresponds to in the input geometry.
On the right,
the IDs listed on triangles will
be returned when primitive ID is
fetched for any fragment within that
triangle in your fragment shader.
Now, if the triangle gets
clipped by the hardware,
a child triangle inherits the
primitive ID of its parent.
And in the presence of tessellation,
the primitive ID simply
corresponds to the patch ID.
In the Metal shading language,
primitive ID is an unsigned integer.
Let’s take a look at a
use case for primitive ID.
Temporal anti-aliasing is a
technique that reduces the
ghosting and shimmering artifacts
caused by motion between frames.
It works by accumulating pixel
data from the previous frame
and blending it with the current
render results for the fragment.
Primitive ID can be used with
temporal anti-aliasing to validate
the sample from the previous frame.
So, how would you actually
do this in practice?
First, in your fragment shader,
you reproject the results from the
previous frame to fetch pixel history.
Then, you introspect the pixel
to ensure that the data is
consistent with the current frame.
This can be done by comparing the
primitive IDs of the two samples.
If the IDs match,
you can choose to accumulate the
contribution from the previous frame.
The pixel history can be accumulated
or reset post-introspection,
forwarding the results
onto the next frame.
Now that we have introduced barycentric
coordinates and primitive ID,
let’s take a deeper dive.
Starting with deferred rendering,
a technique you are likely
already familiar with.
Deferred rendering classically
operates in two stages.
The first stage,
generating a surface attribute
buffer called the G-buffer,
and the second stage,
which consumes the G-buffer and
applies lighting on the scene.
But if you are running at high
resolution or using multi-sampling,
the size of the G-buffer
can be quite large,
and reading and writing of these buffers
could have prohibitive bandwidth costs.
To address this problem,
the G-buffer could be
replaced with a thin buffer,
which contains the minimal
set of surface attributes.
This buffer is called
the visibility buffer.
The visibility buffer minimizes the
work in the geometry stage by greatly
simplifying the output from this stage.
All the material logic you would
typically perform in the fragment
shader in deferred rendering to generate
material properties in the G-Buffer
are now moved to the lighting phase.
By doing this,
we no longer have to store all material
properties in the intermediate buffer.
Without material function,
the complexity of the geometry
stage is greatly reduced,
allowing for a high fill rate and
minimum traffic between the vertex
shader and the fragment shader.
This technique adds a new
reconstruction step during the
lighting pass to reconstruct the
material inputs from the minimal data
set inside the visibility buffer.
Let’s take a look at what the
visibility buffer will contain.
The visibility buffer only needs
to contain two attributes to
facilitate geometry reconstruction.
The primitive ID can be used
to manually retrieve vertex
data from the vertex buffer,
effectively doing a
deferred vertex fetch.
Barycentric coordinates are
used to interpolate vertex
data for the current fragment.
As mentioned before,
you can access these attributes
in your fragment shader on A14.
Let’s take a closer look at the two
stages of the visibility buffer pipeline.
At a high level, the visibility buffer
approach has two stages:
the geometry stage,
which produces the visibility buffer,
and the lighting stage that consumes it.
In the geometry stage,
the vertex shader's transformation
only generates the position
needed for rasterization.
The fragment stage can generate
the primitive ID and barycentric
coordinates with the new A14
Metal shading language attributes,
without the need for any
additional variances.
In the lighting stage,
a new reconstruction step will
use a deferred vertex fetch
based on the primitive ID,
and interpolate the vertex data
using barycentric coordinates to
generate material function inputs.
The material and lighting shaders
are effectively untouched and
are identical to the deferred
rendering implementations.
Let’s take a look at how interfaces
between these stages have been minimized.
The vertex shader only requires
the position to rasterize.
The fragment shader generates the
surface ID and barycentric coordinates
for the visibility buffer that is
fed into the reconstruction step.
And only after the reconstruction step
do we have the large reconstructed
material input data in memory,
which is used by the material
model and the lighting functions.
Now that we have
introduced the interfaces,
let’s take a look at the shaders that
are generating these inputs and outputs.
Let’s start with the geometry phase,
which has a simple vertex
and fragment shader.
The vertex shader only needs to
transform and output the position.
In the fragment shader,
we make use of the new primitive ID and
barycentric coordinates available
in the Metal shading language.
We combine the primitive
ID and additional draw index
into our surface identifier,
so we can identify primitives
across vertex buffers,
as we will see later.
Now,
let's take a look at the lighting stage.
At a high level,
the lighting stage has three steps:
Reconstruction,
Material Model and Lighting Function.
The Reconstruction step will reconstruct
material input from our surface
identifier and barycentric coordinates.
Then we can execute our material model
steps as we do in our deferred shader.
And finally,
we apply our lighting function
to write out the final lit pixel.
As mentioned previously,
the material and the lighting stages
are identical to classic deferred.
So, let’s take a look at the
reconstruction step in more detail.
The main purpose of the reconstruction
step is the transformation of
the incoming visibility buffer
fragment to material inputs.
First, this requires generating vertex
data for a given fragment using
primitive ID and draw ID contained
in the surface identifier.
An additional index facilitates
having different vertex
buffers across fragments.
For this, we use a draw identifier
to reference the draw call.
Second,
the barycentric coordinates are used for
interpolation in the reconstruction step.
Let’s examine the dereferencing tree.
Here, we show the dereferencing tree
needed to resolve a visibility
buffer pixel back to the original
interpolated vertex attributes.
The visibility buffer contains
two barycentric coordinates.
The third coordinate can be
retrieved from the other two since
the sum of all three is unity.
It also contains a combination
of the draw ID and primitive
ID as mentioned before.
From the draw ID,
the draw state can be retrieved,
allowing access to per draw properties
such as view projection matrix.
From there,
we can retrieve the vertex and the
index buffer from the mesh state.
These indices are needed
to fetch the vertex data.
And we can also use the
same path to retrieve
material-specific data that we need.
Now, if our material model
becomes more complicated,
we can add a material function pointer
to execute specific material logic.
Let’s take a look at how
reconstruction looks in shader code.
The first thing to do in your
reconstruction function is
to retrieve the primitive ID,
draw ID, and barycentric coordinates
from the visibility buffer.
After that,
you can proceed to retrieve the mesh
ID from the draw state using the draw ID.
The index buffer needs to be
dereferenced to retrieve the vertex
indices within the vertex buffers
using primitive ID and mesh ID.
Then, the vertex buffer data can be
read and interpolated across
barycentric coordinates.
Additionally,
matrices and other ProDraw info
can be retrieved to do deferred
vertex transformations on geometry
such as normals and tangents.
Once the material input
has been generated,
the data is fed into the material
logic and lighting functions
as discussed previously.
Let’s take a look at
Visibility Buffer in action.
Here’s a modern rendering scene
that is using the visibility
buffer running on the iPhone.
It is implementing a tile lighting
technique that makes use of multiple
materials and a scene filled with lights.
Normally in classic deferred,
this would have required multiple
G-Buffer channels such as normal,
albedo, roughness, etc.
accounting for quite a large G-Buffer.
But with visibility buffer,
we only need a surface ID and
barycentric coordinates.
First, we store the generated
surface identifier,
visualized here with a brightness and
a hue showing draw ID and primitive ID,
respectively.
Second,
we store the barycentric coordinates,
visualized here, with the red,
green and blue color channels.
These two properties are enough
to efficiently reconstruct the
geometry and apply deferred material
shading and lighting models.
With this technique,
the G buffer size is significantly
reduced on the A14 using
the thin visibility buffer.
In our example,
we save more than 40% of our G buffer
size compared to classic deferred.
So, that wraps up our deep dive on
barycentric coordinates and primitive ID.
Now, let’s take a quick look at the new
texture addressing modes in A14.
These modes specify how to
handle texture coordinates that
are outside the sampling range,
and are quite handy when
you’re using Texture Atlas.
We’ve added two new addressing
modes in Metal for A14.
With Mirror Clamped to
Edge Addressing mode,
the texture coordinates within
the range of the extents are
mirrored across the axis,
and when they fall outside,
they’re clamped.
You can see this in the
picture on the right.
We’ve also added Border Color Clamp mode,
where you can choose one of the
presets between transparent black,
opaque black and opaque white.
The usage is fairly simple.
First, you need to create a
sampler descriptor object.
Then, you can specify the
clamp modes for depth,
width,
and height coordinates independently
by setting the address modes.
If you’re using clamp-to-border color,
you can set one of the
presets supported in Metal.
After this,
you can create the sampler state
object with the sampler descriptor.
So, that was an overview of the
new graphics features in A14.
Now, I would like to hand it off to
my colleague Swami to describe
the new compute features
that the A14 GPU enables,
starting with SIMD reduction.
Thank you, Anaand.
I am Swaminathan Narayanan,
and I work for GPU Software.
Metal is designed to enable
high-performance graphics as well as
to perform data parallel calculations,
and it provides a variety of advanced
compute features that leverage
the tremendous power of the GPU.
On the A14 Bionic,
Metal now provides SIMD scope
reduction instructions,
which provide a way for apps to perform
reductions incredibly efficiently.
To understand how they work,
let’s briefly review parallel
reduction operations.
Reduction operations are used
to reduce the elements of
an array to a single result.
For example,
a sum reduction is used to add
up all the elements of an array.
This can be useful for
computing averages.
Another example is to compute
the min and max values of a seam.
Those values can then be used
in tone mapping algorithms.
Classically, all these operations were
computed severely on the CPU.
However, Metal can take advantage of the
parallel nature of the GPU to compute
reductions much more efficiently.
On the A14 GPU,
Metal now supports several
SIMD-scope reduction instructions.
SIMD sum and SIMD product generate
the sum and product of a variable
across all sets in the SIMD group.
SIMD minimum and SIMD maximum can be used
to find the minimum and maximum values.
These four instructions work on
floating point and integer types.
In addition,
Metal now supports reductions
using bitwise operators AND,
OR and XOR.
Naturally,
these work only on integer types.
Before going over the reduction
operations in more detail,
let’s look at how threads are organized
into thread groups and SIMD groups.
Compute Dispatches launch a
set of individual threads that
are represented as a grid.
This grid of threads are
divided into smaller subgrids
that are called thread groups.
Thread groups are further
organized into groups of 32 threads
that are called SIMD groups.
The threads of a SIMD group
run concurrently in lockstep.
SIMD group functions exploit
this lockstep execution to
share data between its threads.
Now that we’ve seen how SIMD groups
and Thread groups are organized,
let’s take a look at how Threads
are executed in SIMD groups.
The SIMD group has 32 lanes that are
represented down the left side here.
Each of these lanes will run a
thread from the compute dispatch.
Now, let’s have all the threads
in the SIMD group store their
lane IDs into the variable x.
Notice how each lane
has its own value of x.
In the SIMD Group execution model,
the instruction that sets the variable
x to the lane ID is only fetched once
and is then executed simultaneously
in log step by the 32 threads.
SIMD Group functions allow each
of its threads to inspect and use
variables of the other threads in
the SIMD Group with minimal overhead.
Let’s take a look at SIMD-SUM,
one of the new instructions added in A14.
SIMD sum adds up values of a
variable across all active threads
in the SIMD group and broadcasts
the sum back to all the threads.
Here we are adding the values
of the variable x across the
32 lanes of the SIMD group.
Once the instruction is executed,
the resulting sum is then
available in the variable f.
Note that all active threads can
inspect their copy of the variable
f to get at the computed sum of 496.
Inactive threads are skipped
in the computation correctly.
They do not contribute to the final sum.
Now let’s take a look at how we
can use SIMDsum to speed up adding
the elements of a large array.
Here the input array is in device memory.
Each SIMD group reads a sub-region
of the input array and computes its
sum using the SIMD Summon function.
This sum is then written to
an array in Z-group memory.
Every SIMD group has a distinct
ID that it can use to index
into the Z-group sum array.
The last executing SIMD group in
the thread group uses the SIMDsum
instruction again to get the final sum.
By using SIMDsum,
we have decreased the number of
thread group barriers and the
usage of thread group memory.
The SIMDsum instruction also gets
executed only once to compute the sum
of all the threads in the SIMD group.
Now let’s go to the implementation
of the compute kernel.
Here we have the code that implements
parallel reduction using SIMDsum.
Each thread in the SIMD group
reads its corresponding
element from the input array.
Then it computes a first SIMD group
sum using the SIMDsum instruction.
This sum is then written to
an array in Z-group memory,
which is indexed using the SIMD group ID.
Note that we need a barrier before we
can access the array in Z-group memory.
The last SIMD group in each thread
group then uses the SIMD sum
instruction again to get the final sum.
Let us take a look at the other reduction
operations we have introduced in A14.
We’ve already seen SIMD sum,
which adds up the values of x
across all the active lanes.
Now let’s look at SIMDmax and
apply it to the variable x.
Early lane then gets the maximum value,
which is 31,
across all the threads in the SIMD group.
Similarly,
SIMD Mint stores the minimum value of x,
which happens to be 0 in this case,
across all the active lanes.
Finally, we have SIMD product,
which multiplies up all the values of x.
As one of the variables
happens to be zero,
the final product that
is broadcast is zero.
These instructions work on
both integer and floating
point scalar and vector types.
Reduction operations are also supported
for bitwise operations on integral types.
Each lane now has a bitfield
value manufactured using
the lane ID as shown here.
We can then use the
SIMD ALL instruction on the variable x.
The values of x across all the
active lanes are all together and
broadcasted back to the variable f.
This final value happens
to be 0x1f3 in our example.
Similarly,
SIMD XOR computes the XOR values of X and
broadcasts back the resulting value,
which turns out to be 0x0.
Finally, we have SIMD_AND,
which ANDs up all the values of x across
all the threads in the SIMD group.
This turns out to be the constant 0x3.
That was an overview of the new
SIMD scope reduction instructions
available in the A14 GPU.
Now, let’s take a look at a new set of
SIMD scope instructions that greatly
improves matrix multiplication.
Matrix multiplication is a very
common operation for GPU compute
and is the basic building block for
many parallel computing workloads.
For example, in machine learning,
it is used when computing convolution
and fully connected neuron layers.
Linear algebra is used to represent
and solve systems of equations.
The A14 introduces a brand new
set of SIMD scope instructions,
which allows you to implement large
matrix multipliers very efficiently.
Like the reduction
operations we saw before,
these are SIMD group scoped operations.
You can now easily build larger,
more sophisticated functions on
top of these building blocks.
In the Metal shading language,
we now have SIMD group
scoped data structures that
represent 8x8 and 4x4 matrices.
You can then use multiply or
multiply accumulate versions of the
SIMD group scoped matrix operations.
Let’s look at an example of
multiplying through 16x16 matrices
in a Z-group using these functions.
We’re going to use the 8x8 SIMD group
matrix operation to build a 16x16
clear group matrix multiplication.
First, we partition the result matrix
across four SIMD groups.
Each SIMD group will be responsible for
computing one 8x8 quadrant of the result.
Next,
we partition the first input matrix.
Here, each SIMD group in a row
shares a single block column.
Then, we partition the second input.
Here, each SIMD group in a column
shares a single block row.
Then we will accumulate the
products from the first set
of 8x8 results and the second.
Now let's look at how to write
this in the Metal shading language.
With A14,
we have introduced new SIMD group matrix
objects and multiplication operations
into the Metal shading language.
These new parameters will greatly
improve the performance of your
matrix multiplications in your shader.
It's easy to use and can be done
with just a few lines of shader code.
Here we define three objects to
represent 8x8 matrices with data
in 32-bit loading point format.
We have a matrix for each of our
inputs and one for our result.
Next, we perform the address arithmetic
necessary to partition our
four SIMD groups across
each quadrant of the result.
Then we accumulate sub-matrices
from each source matrix,
broadcasting the appropriate row
and column to each SIMD group.
Finally, we store the results.
You can see how easy it is to
construct more complex shaders
using these new primitives.
If you are using
Metal performance heaters,
you will benefit from SIMD group
scope matrix multipliers to accelerate
not only matrix multiplication
but also CNN convolutions.
Matrix multiplication for
arbitrary sizes can be performed
using MPS matrix multiplication.
Here we are encoding a kernel to compute
a result with M rows and M columns.
CNN convolutions can be performed
using MPS-CNN convolution.
Here we are encoding a convolution
kernel or a batch of images.
Both of these kernels are available
using the new Metal Performance Shaders
Graph introduced this year with iOS 14.
MPS Graph allows you to take these
basic kernels and build complex
machine learning networks with them.
As an example,
let’s look at how the matrix
multiplication kernel from
earlier can be used in the graph.
Here, we’ll initialize a new
graph for our operation.
Then we define nodes to
represent our two input matrices.
Then we construct a new result
node from our input using a
matrix multiplication operation.
Finally, we execute the graph.
For more details on how to use
MPS kernels and graph operations,
please refer to previously
available WWDC presentations.
As mentioned before,
MPS will automatically take advantage
of A14 for these operations.
Here we can see the improved
throughput of general matrix
multiplications on A14 relative to A13.
On A14, using the new SIMD group
matrix multiplier operations,
average performance is improved by 37%.
CNN conclusions on A14 show an
average improvement of 36% from A13.
And when we look at training
a full machine learning
network like Inception V3,
A14 improves by 22%. That wraps up
SIMD group scope matrix multiplication.
Let’s recap the new
Metal features for the A14.
Baricentric coordinates
and primitive ID enable new
deferred rendering techniques,
including visibility buffer rendering.
New texture addressing modes which
are useful when using texture atlases.
SIMD group scope reduction
instructions that enable better
communication between threads.
We also include compute and
machine learning performance
with SIMD Group Scope
Matrix Multiply instructions.
And finally,
Metal on A14 takes advantage of a
host of architectural improvements,
saving bandwidth with
improved lossless compression,
faster and more efficient local memory,
and better GPU-driven pipelines.
Thank you for watching.